# Reflective AI usage

We’re entering an era where access to technology, knowledge, and tools offers more people than ever before the
opportunity to grow — regardless of where they live, their income, or education level. Our mission is to democratize
access to programming, entrepreneurship, and digital skills. Today, we can achieve things that would have seemed
impossible just a decade ago — thanks to AI.

Every step forward in tech development, especially in social and educational contexts, requires decisions, courage,
knowledge, and collaboration. Integrating AI into our daily work isn’t just the next step — it’s a paradigm shift. AI
doesn’t just support us in analysis, creation, and planning. More and more often, it actually does the work — work we
previously couldn’t complete alone. That’s a tremendous opportunity — and a responsibility.

As a mission-driven organization, our role is to build a space where technology serves people. And to do that, we need
to stay ahead. We need to be reflective in how we use AI — not blindly following trends, but consciously experimenting,
learning, **and sharing what we discover.**

---

## Reflective AI use is now the standard

Some of you are already using AI daily — as a thought partner, research assistant, writing aid, coding helper, or even a
mentoring tool. That’s great. **But it’s only the beginning** — even those of us who use AI regularly feel like we’ve
only scratched the surface of what’s possible.

We’re seeing that those who already use AI with skill and awareness are accomplishing things that once seemed out of
reach — 10x faster, better, and with more impact. We see interns with little practical knowledge jumping right into
complicated environments, we see them deliver tasks in no-time. **AI doesn’t replace people — it amplifies them.**

---

## What this means for us

**Using AI is the new baseline** – We can no longer ignore it. This isn’t a passing trend. AI is now a universal tool.
**If you’re not learning to use it, you’re falling behind.** Want to be part of the change? Start experimenting. Every
project, every initiative — starts with AI – AI should be present from the prototyping and testing phase. It lets us
learn, build, and iterate faster — **which means we can do more for our community.**

AI usage will be part of our expectations, so we’ll ask: How are you using AI? What have you learned? What’s working,
what isn’t? This will help us grow — together. You’re learning on your own — but share what you discover – We have
access to amazing tools: ChatGPT, Copilot, Claude, Cursor… but we learn the most from each other. Don’t keep your
insights to yourself — share them. **That’s our shared knowledge base.**

Now, as Generacja Innowacja, we have everything we need to be at the forefront of polish NGO sector in the area of
technology. We can create complex IT solutions and we know it. We maintain products that have 4.5M users. As every NGO,
**we're missing just one thing: time.** AI gives us the opportunity to save time and focus on what matters most:
**people**, not code.

---

## Security and ethics

In a world where AI can generate text, code, and ideas at lightning speed, it is our responsibility to ensure safety —
both digital and ethical. As we use AI, we must stay vigilant in several key areas:

- **Data:** Never input sensitive, personal, or proprietary data into AI models — especially if it’s not yours, or you
don’t have the right to share it.
- **Content verification:** AI can be wrong. Always review generated content, especially if it’s intended for public
communication or will reach our community.
- **Ethics:** Remember that AI can reproduce biases or stereotypes — not intentionally, but effectively. Use tools
mindfully, always asking: Does what I’m creating serve people in a responsible way?
- **Reporting concerns:** If you encounter something suspicious or believe an AI tool is behaving inappropriately, speak
up. We're building a culture where safety is a shared responsibility.

AI is a powerful tool, but we are responsible for how we use it. **The trust we hold as a foundation depends on
transparency, caution, and accountability.** We can’t afford to take this lightly.

---

## Our path forward

AI changes everything — our work, our thinking, our education systems, our programming practices, and our communities.
We’re not just watching this shift happen. We're not falling behind, we’re a part of it.

As a pro bono tech organization, our responsibility is to ask: What does equal opportunity look like in a world where AI
is available to everyone? How can we support young people, mentors, teachers, programmers and activists — so AI becomes
their ally, not a barrier?

I believe we’ll find the answers — through action, curiosity, and the courage to keep experimenting.
